Iceberg Integration documentation (#5918)
influxdata/docs-v2: content/shared/influxdb3-query-guides/snapshots/snowflake.md

# Integrate with Snowflake using Apache Iceberg

Export time-series data snapshots from InfluxDB into Apache Iceberg format.
Integrate data with Snowflake and other Iceberg-compatible tools without the need for complex ETL processes.

### Key Benefits

> - **Efficient data access**: Query InfluxDB data directly from Snowflake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Efficient data access**: Query your data directly from Snowflake.
```

We avoid saying "InfluxDB data", because it's the customer's data.

- **Cost-effective storage**: Optimize data retention and minimize storage costs.
- **Supports AI and ML workloads**: Enhance machine learning applications by making time-series data accessible in Snowflake.

> 

Reviewer: We should remove the "Step <num>" from the headings and add a numbered-list TOC for the steps here.

- A **Snowflake account** with necessary permissions.
- Access to an **external object store** (such as AWS S3).
- Familiarity with **Apache Iceberg** and **Snowflake**.

## Step 1: Configure external storage

Set up an external storage location (such as AWS S3) to store Iceberg table data and metadata.

### Example: Configure an S3 stage in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE STAGE my_s3_stage 
URL='s3://my-bucket/'
STORAGE_INTEGRATION=my_storage_integration;
```

For more details, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration-object-storage).

## Step 2: Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake

Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake to manage and load Iceberg tables efficiently.

### Example: Create a catalog integration in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE CATALOG INTEGRATION my_catalog_integration
  CATALOG_SOURCE = 'OBJECT_STORE'
  TABLE_FORMAT = 'ICEBERG'
  ENABLED = TRUE;
```

For more information, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration).

## Step 3: Export InfluxDB data to Iceberg format

> Use the InfluxData's Iceberg exporter to convert and export your time-series data from your {{% product-name omit="Clustered" %}} cluster into the Iceberg table format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use InfluxData's Iceberg exporter to convert and export your time-series data from your {{% product-name omit="Clustered" %}} cluster into the Iceberg table format.
```

# Integrating InfluxDB with Snowflake Using Apache Iceberg

## Overview

> Snapshots for Snowflake enable users to export time-series data from InfluxDB into a structured format using Apache Iceberg. This integration facilitates efficient data sharing between InfluxDB and Snowflake without the need for complex ETL processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Export time-series data snapshots from InfluxDB into Apache Iceberg format.
Integrate data with Snowflake and other Iceberg-compatible tools without the need for complex ETL processes.
```

- "Snapshots for Snowflake" suggests that this is the feature name.
Let's keep Snowflake prominent, but primarily emphasize exporting in Iceberg format (which most of the page does).
- Use second person
- Avoid big words like "facilitates"

### Key Benefits

- **Efficient data access**: Query InfluxDB data directly from Snowflake.
- **Cost-effective storage**: Optimize data retention and minimize storage costs.
- **Supports AI and ML workloads**: Enhance machine learning applications by making time-series data accessible in Snowflake.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following:

- A **Snowflake account** with necessary permissions.
- Access to an **external object store** (such as AWS S3).
- Familiarity with **Apache Iceberg** and **Snowflake**.

> ## Step-by-step guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Step 1: Configure external storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Configure external storage
```

Set up an external storage location (such as AWS S3) to store Iceberg table data and metadata.

> #### Example: Configure an S3 stage in Snowflake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Configure an S3 stage in Snowflake
```

```sql
CREATE STAGE my_s3_stage 
URL='s3://my-bucket/'
STORAGE_INTEGRATION=my_storage_integration;
```

For more details, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration-object-storage).

> ### Step 2: Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2: Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake
```

Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake to manage and load Iceberg tables efficiently.

> #### Example: Create a catalog integration in Snowflake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Create a catalog integration in Snowflake
```

```sql
CREATE CATALOG INTEGRATION my_catalog_integration
  CATALOG_SOURCE = 'OBJECT_STORE'
  TABLE_FORMAT = 'ICEBERG'
  ENABLED = TRUE;
```

> For more details, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration).
```

> ### Step 3: Export InfluxDB data to Iceberg format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 3: Export InfluxDB data to Iceberg format
```

> Use InfluxDB's Iceberg Exporter to convert and export your time-series data into the Iceberg table format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the InfluxData's Iceberg exporter to convert and export your time-series data from your {{% product-name omit="Clustered" %}} cluster into the Iceberg table format.
```

Use the specific version name (`product-name` shortcode); the exporter isn't compatible with all versions (I assume). This becomes even more important for relying on AI to "deduce" feature support.

> #### Example: Export data using the Iceberg Exporter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Export data using the Iceberg exporter
```

```sh
# Clone the Iceberg exporter repository
git clone https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb_iox.git
cd influxdb_iox/iceberg_exporter
```

> - Configure the exporter with your InfluxDB data source and target Iceberg table location.

Reviewer: Add an example here and description of "InfluxDB data source"

(Important, but shouldn't prevent you releasing this)

- Run the exporter to generate Iceberg-compatible Parquet files.

> For more details, refer to the [Iceberg Exporter README](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb_iox/tree/main/iceberg_exporter).

Reviewer: Add an example for running the exporter.

(Important, but shouldn't prevent you releasing this)

### Step 4: Create an Iceberg table in Snowflake

After exporting the data, create an Iceberg table in Snowflake.

#### Example: Create an Iceberg table in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE ICEBERG TABLE my_iceberg_table
  EXTERNAL_VOLUME = 'my_external_volume'
  METADATA_FILE_PATH = 's3://my-bucket/path/to/metadata.json';
```

> Ensure that `EXTERNAL_VOLUME` and `METADATA_FILE_PATH` point to your external storage and metadata file.

Reviewer: I would describe these in separate bullet points.

> ### Step 5: Query the Iceberg table from Snowflake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Query the Iceberg table from Snowflake
```

Once the Iceberg table is set up, you can query it using standard SQL in Snowflake.

> #### Example: Query the Iceberg table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: Query the Iceberg table
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM my_iceberg_table
WHERE timestamp > '2025-01-01';
```

## Interfaces for using Iceberg integration

> - **CLI**: `Influx CTL` enables users to trigger snapshot exports.
> - **API**: Provides REST endpoints to manage and configure snapshots.
> - **SQL (Snowflake)**: Query Iceberg tables using standard SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Use the CLI to trigger snapshot exports](#use-the-CLI-to-trigger-snapshot-exports)
- [Use the API to manage and configure snapshots](#use-the-api-to-manage-and-configure-snapshots)
- [Use SQL in Snowflake to query Iceberg tables](#use-sql-in-snowflake-to-query-iceberg-tables)
```

> ## CLI and API reference
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### CLI commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use the CLI to trigger snapshot exports
```

#### Example: Enable Iceberg feature and export a snapshot

```sh
# Enable Iceberg feature
influxctl enable-iceberg

# Export a snapshot
influxctl export --namespace foo --table bar
```

> ### API endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use the API to manage and configure snapshots

Use the {{% product-name %}} HTTP API to export snapshots and check status.
```

We try to be specific about _HTTP API_ (vs Flight query APIs)

#### Example: Export a snapshot

- **Method**: `POST`
- **Endpoint**: `/snapshots/export`
- **Request body**:
  
```json
{
  "namespace": "foo",
  "table": "bar"
}
```

#### Example: Check snapshot status

- **Method**: `GET`
- **Endpoint**: `/snapshots/status`

## Considerations and limitations

- **Data consistency**: Ensure that the exported data in the Iceberg table is consistent with the source data in InfluxDB.
- **Performance**: Query performance may vary based on data size and query complexity.
- **Feature support**: Some advanced features of InfluxDB may not be fully supported in Snowflake through Iceberg integration.

> ## Next steps
> 
> - Enhance REST Catalog support.
> - Optimize AWS S3 access control and security.
> - Improve Grafana dashboards and alerting.
> - Expand compatibility testing with other Iceberg engines.
> 
> ## References
> 
> - **InfluxDB Iceberg Exporter**: [GitHub Repository](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb_iox/tree/main/iceberg_exporter)
> - **Snowflake Iceberg Tables**: [Snowflake Documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We don't want to forecast features or changes and you already have the links in context.

Export time series data snapshots from InfluxDB into Apache Iceberg format and query it from Snowflake.

### Key Benefits

- **Efficient data access**: Query your data directly from Snowflake.
- **Cost-effective storage**: Optimize data retention and minimize storage costs.
- **Supports AI and ML workloads**: Enhance machine learning applications by making time-series data accessible in Snowflake.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following:

- A **Snowflake account** with necessary permissions.
- Access to an **external object store** (such as AWS S3).
- Familiarity with **Apache Iceberg** and **Snowflake**.

## Integrate InfluxDB 3 with Snowflake

1. [Configure external storage](#configure-external-storage)
2. [Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake](#set-up-a-catalog-integration-in-snowflake)
3. [Export InfluxDB data to Iceberg format](#export-influxdb-data-to-iceberg-format)
4. [Create an Iceberg table in Snowflake](#create-an-iceberg-table-in-snowflake)
5. [Query your data in Snowflake](#query-your-data-in-snowflake)

### Create a Snowflake external stage

Use the `CREATE STAGE` Snowflake SQL command to set up an external storage location

> (such as AWS S3) to store Iceberg table data and metadata--for example:

Reviewer 2: Yes, thats along the lines of what i was thinking. The flow would be pretty much the same, Contact sales to get iceberg.  Once your tables have been set up for iceberg, some details on how your support engineers will set up export and help set up the catalog integrations in snowflake...

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, ensure you have the following:

- A **Snowflake account** with necessary permissions.
- Access to an **external object store** (such as AWS S3).
- Familiarity with **Apache Iceberg** and **Snowflake**.

## Configure external storage

Set up an external storage location (such as AWS S3) to store Iceberg table data and metadata.

### Example: Configure an S3 stage in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE STAGE my_s3_stage 
URL='s3://my-bucket/'
STORAGE_INTEGRATION=my_storage_integration;
```

For more details, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration-object-storage).

## Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake

Set up a catalog integration in Snowflake to manage and load Iceberg tables efficiently.

### Example: Create a catalog integration in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE CATALOG INTEGRATION my_catalog_integration
  CATALOG_SOURCE = 'OBJECT_STORE'
  TABLE_FORMAT = 'ICEBERG'
  ENABLED = TRUE;
```

For more information, refer to the [Snowflake documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/user-guide/tables-iceberg-configure-catalog-integration).

> ## Export InfluxDB data to Iceberg format

Reviewer 3: Side note, this is where Dedicated and Clustered are going to diverge, so we'll likely need unique docs for each. I believe we will be doing the data export for Dedicated customers, but Clustered users will have to do it for themselves.

Use InfluxData's Iceberg exporter to convert and export your time-series data from your {{% product-name omit="Clustered" %}} cluster to the Iceberg table format.

### Example: Export data using Iceberg exporter

This example assumes the following:

- You have followed the example for [writing and querying data in the IOx README](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb_iox/blob/main/README.md#write-and-read-data).
- You've configured compaction to trigger more quickly with these environment variables:
  - `INFLUXDB_IOX_COMPACTION_MIN_NUM_L0_FILES_TO_COMPACT=1`

>   - `INFLUXDB_IOX_COMPACTION_MIN_NUM_L1_FILES_TO_COMPACT=1`

Reviewer 2: These are just internal testing instructions, lets not include these.

- You have a `config.json`.

#### Example `config.json`

```json
{
    "exports": [
        {
            "namespace": "company_sensors",
            "table_name": "cpu"
        }
    ]
}
```

#### Running the export command

```console
$ influxdb_iox iceberg export \
  --catalog-dsn postgresql://postgres@localhost:5432/postgres \
  --source-object-store file 
  --source-data-dir ~/.influxdb_iox/object_store \
  --sink-object-store file \
  --sink-data-dir /tmp/iceberg \
  --export-config-path config.json

> ```

Reviewer 2: No these are local testing instructions . i am going through this PR now, sorry i was buried under a lot of notifications and had not noticed this. I will provide detailed instructions by EOD.

After exporting the data, create an Iceberg table in Snowflake.

#### Example: Create an Iceberg table in Snowflake

```sql
CREATE ICEBERG TABLE my_iceberg_table
  EXTERNAL_VOLUME = 'my_external_volume'
  METADATA_FILE_PATH = 's3://my-bucket/path/to/metadata.json';
```

Ensure that `EXTERNAL_VOLUME` and `METADATA_FILE_PATH` point to your external storage and metadata file.

## Query the Iceberg table from Snowflake

Once the Iceberg table is set up, you can query it using standard SQL in Snowflake.

### Example: Query the Iceberg table

```sql
SELECT * FROM my_iceberg_table
WHERE timestamp > '2025-01-01';
```

## Interfaces for using Iceberg integration

- [Use the CLI to trigger snapshot exports](#use-the-CLI-to-trigger-snapshot-exports)
- [Use the API to manage and configure snapshots](#use-the-api-to-manage-and-configure-snapshots)
- [Use SQL in Snowflake to query Iceberg tables](#use-sql-in-snowflake-to-query-iceberg-tables)

### Use the CLI to trigger snapshot exports

#### Example: Enable Iceberg feature and export a snapshot

```sh
# Enable Iceberg feature
$ influxctl enable-iceberg

# Export a snapshot
$ influxctl export --namespace foo --table bar

> ```

Reviewer 3: This commands should be used in the process above, not `influxdb_iox`
